At the intersection of geographical analysis and data science, this
book serves as an introduction to a whole new way of thinking
systematically about geographic data, using geographical analysis and
computation to unlock new insights hidden within data. Geographic
information scientists interested in the emerging field of data
science, and data scientists looking to work with geographic data,
will want to read this book.

The book covers the central data structures and representations in
geographic data science and the visualization and analysis of
geographic data. A key goal is to build the intuition of how to imbue
spatial thinking in data science problems. Advanced methods include
the analysis of spatial inequality dynamics, detecting points
clustering in space, identifying geographic regions latent within
data, and integrating geographical spillovers in standard supervised
learning approaches.

Sergio Rey is Professor of Geography and Founding Director of the
Center for Open Geographical Science at San Diego State University.
Rey's research and teaching focus on spatial data science,
geocomputation, spatial inequality dynamics, regional science, and
open science. Dani Arribas-Bel is Professor in Geographic Data
Science at the Department of Geography and Planning of the University
of Liverpool (UK), and Deputy Programme Director for Urban Analytics
at the Alan Turing Institute. His research interests are urban
analytics, geographic data science, and open source scientific
computing and reproducibility. Levi Wolf is Senior Lecturer in
Quantitative Human Geography at the University of Bristol. He works in
spatial data science, building new methods and software to learn new
things about social and natural processes. All three authors are core
contributors to the Python Spatial Analysis Library (PySAL) and have
taught workshops on PySAL worldwide.
